 The interaction between viscous fluid flows and elastic objects is common across
many microscale phenomena. I will focus, specifically, on some recent results from and new
research directions for my research group, the Transport: Modeling, Numerics & Theory
laboratory at Purdue. The interaction between an internal flow and a soft boundary presents
an example of a fluid--structure interaction (FSI). This particular type of FSI is relevant to
problems from lab-on-a-chip microdevices for rapid diagnostics to blood pressure
measurement cuffs. Experimentally, a microchannel or a blood vessel is found to deform into
a non-uniform cross-section due to FSIs. Specifically, deformation leads to a non-linear
relationship between the volumetric flow rate and the pressure drop (unlike Poiseuille’s law)
at steady state. We have developed a perturbative approach to deriving these relations.
Specifically, the Stokes equations for vanishing Reynolds number are coupled to the
governing equations of an elastic rectangular plate or axisymmetric cylindrical shell. For
example, the vessel’s deformation can be captured using Kirchhoff--Love plate theory or
Donnell--Sanders shell theory under the assumption of a thin, slender geometry. For the
case of shells, an elegant matched asymptotics problem (with a boundary layer and a corner
layer) provides a closed-form expression for a deformed microtube's radius. Several
mathematical predictions arise from this approach: the flow rate--pressure drop relation, the
cross-sectional deformation profile of the soft conduit, and the scaling of the maximum
displacement with the flow rate. To verify the mathematical predictions, we perform fully 3D,
two-way coupled direct numerical simulations using the commercial software suite ANSYS.
The numerical results are first benchmarked against experimental data in the literature.
Then, the numerical results are compared against the mathematical predictions, showing
excellent agreement. Some extensions to bio/physiological situations (e.g., hyperelastic
conduits and non-Newtonian fluids) and to unsteady flows (e.g., stop-flow lithography in
compliant microchannels) will be discussed.
