We develop and analyze a 2x2 dynamical system describing flow through a single pore to study the
dynamics of the appearance and dissolution of gas bubbles during two-component (CO2, H2O), two-phase
(gas, liquid) flow. Our analysis indicates that three regimes occur at conditions pertinent to petroleum
reservoirs. These regimes correspond to a critical point changing type from an unstable node to an unstable
spiral and then to a stable spiral as flow rates increase. Only in the stable spiral case do gas bubbles achieve
a steady-state finite size. Otherwise, all gas bubbles that form undergo, possibly oscillatory, growth and then
dissolve completely. Under steady flow conditions, this formation and dissolution repeats cyclically.
Background Introduction: Compositional flow involving a dissolved gas is of importance in many areas,
including oil reservoir production, pipeline transport, CO2 sequestration, and the disposal of radioactive
waste. Such flow involves the inherent possibility of creation of a gas phase and its subsequent transport.
Excluding specific tertiary recovery practices such as CO2 foam flooding, keeping potential gas components
dissolved in fluid phases is important for efficient extraction in reservoirs; the presence of gas bubbles and the
resultant fluid-gas menisci complicates flow and can compete with fluid movement. The ability to control
formation pressure or flow rates to prevent bubble formation is important for extraction efficiency. A challenge
to the numerical simulation of compositional flow in porous media is the change in the system of equations
that accompanies the appearance or disappearance of the gas phase. This difficulty has been addressed by
several approaches. In our computations of two-phase, two-component (H2O, CO2) flow in a 3D pore
network, we noted the periodic appearance and dissolution of the gas phase in certain pores. Intensive
evaluation of our algorithms led us to conclude that the phenomenon was not numerical in origin. In reviewing
the literature on gas transport in porous media at reservoir scales, in micromodel studies, specific studies on
gas bubble formation, and mathematical studies of gas phase disappearance in water-hydrogen systems, we
have been unable to find any mention of this periodic phenomenon. We have therefore pursued a
mathematical investigation. In this article, we extract a 2x2 dynamical system from the mathematical model
upon which our computations were based in order to study the mechanics of this phase-cycling phenomenon.
In this talk I will:
- present the mathematical model and derive the dynamical system,
- summarize the direction fields, critical points and solution trajectories,
- report the results of numerical solutions to the dynamical system
- provide summary critique of the work
