 Longevity represents an increasingly important risk for defined benefit
(DB) pension plans and annuity providers, because life expectancy is dramatically
increasing in developed countries. In particular, the sponsors of
DB pension plans are exposed to the risk that unexpected improvements in
the survival rates of pensioners will increase the cost of pension provisions.
Longevity swaps are hedging instruments whereby two parties, typically
a re-insurer or investment bank on one side, and a pension fund or annuity
provider on the other side, agree to exchange fixed payments against
variable payments, as in other swaps. The hedge provider is typically the
investment bank or re-insurer, that pays variable payments based on the
scheme’s actual mortality rates, or on a reference mortality index, and receives
fixed payments based on agreed mortality assumptions, whereas the
hedge buyer is the pension fund or annuity provider, that pays fixed and
receives variable payments. We propose a multistage stochastic programming
(MSP) approach to price longevity swap derivatives, i.e. find the
contract fixed rate, on a risk measure based replication framework. In the
proposed methodology the current pension fund liability market value is
firstly estimated: given an asset universe of tradable and liquid securities
and an investment horizon with discrete rebalancing portfolio periods, we
look for the least expensive trading strategy to replicate the pension fund
future obligations. The present cost of such portfolio, under self-financing
conditions, will provide the current liability value. The pay-off structure
of the longevity swap is then inserted in the MSP model, where the contract
variable rates will be given by a discrete stochastic mortality model,
and the fixed rate of the contract will be set as a variable. In this case we
seek for the least expensive trading strategy, and the least fixed contract
rate, which ensure the minimal improvement in the current liability value.
This fixed rate will be the price of the longevity swap. This procedure
has been used to price different aged-related longevity swaps. 
